XIV. Former Inhabitants and Winter-Visitors
I weathered some merry snow-storms and spent some cheerful winter evenings by my fireside,
while the snow whirled wildly without, and even the hooting of the owl was hushed. For
many weeks I met no one in my walks but those who came occasionally to cut wood and sled
it to the village. The elements, however, abetted me in making a path through the deepest
snow in the woods, for when I had once gone through the wind blew the oak leaves into
my tracks, where they lodged, and by absorbing the rays of the sun melted the snow, and so
not only made a bed for my feet, but in the night their dark line was my guide. For human
society I was obliged to conjure up the former occupants of these woods. Within the memory
of many of my townsmen the road near which my house stands resounded with the laugh and
gossip of inhabitants, and the woods which border it were notched and dotted here and
there with their little gardens and dwellings, though it was then much more shut in by the
forest than now. In some places within my own remembrance the pines would scrape both
sides of a chaise at once, and women and children who were compelled to go this way to Lincoln
alone and on foot did it with fear, and often ran a good deal of the distance. Though mainly
but a humble route to neighboring villages, or for the woodsman's team, it once amused
the traveler more than now by its variety, and lingered longer in his memory. Where now
firm open fields stretched from the village to the woods, it then ran through a maple
swamp on a foundation of logs, the remnants of which doubtless still underlie the present
dusty highway, from the Stratton, now the Alm's House Farm, to Brister's Hill. East
of my bean field, across the road, lived Cato Ingraham, slave of Duncan Ingraham, esquire
gentleman of Concord Village, who built his slave a house, and gave him permission to
live in Walden Woods. Cato, but not Utesensis, but Concordiensis. Some say that he was a
little patch among the walnuts, which he let grow up till he should be old and need them,
but a younger and whiter speculator got them at last. He, too, however, occupies an equally
narrow house at present. Cato's half-obliterated cellar hole still remains, though known to
few, being concealed from the traveler by a fringe of pines. It is now filled with the
smooth sumac rus glabra, and one of the earliest species of golden-rod, Soledago strikta, grows
there luxuriantly. Here, by the very corner of my field still nearer to town, Zilpha,
a colored woman, had her little house, where she spun linen for the townsfolk, making the
loud and notable voice.
At length in the war of 1812 her dwelling was set on fire by English soldiers, prisoners
on parole, when she was away, and her cat and dog and hens were all burned up together.
She led a hard life, and somewhat inhumane. One old frequenter of these woods remembers
that, as he passed her house one noon, he heard her muttering to herself over her gurgling
pot, Ye are all bones, bones! I have seen bricks amid the oak copes there. Down the
road on the right hand, on Brister's Hill, lived Brister Freeman, a handy negro, slave
of Squire Cummings, once. There where grow still the apple trees which Brister planted
and tended, large old trees now, but their fruit still wild and ciderish to my taste.
Not long since I read his epitaph in the old Lincoln Burying Ground, a little on one
side near the unmarked graves of some British grenadiers who fell in the retreat from Concord,
where he is styled Scipio Brister. Scipio Africanus, he had some title to be called,
a man of color, as if he were discolored. It also told me, with staring emphasis, when
he died, which was but an indirect way of informing me that he ever lived. With him
dwelt Fenda, his hospitable wife, who told fortunes, yet pleasantly, large, round, and
black, blacker than any of the children of night. Such a dusky orb as never rose on Concord
before or since. Farther down the hill on the left, on the old road in the woods, are
marks of some homestead of the Stratton family, whose orchard once covered all the slope of
Brister's Hill, but was long since killed out by pitchpines, excepting a few stumps,
whose old roots furnish still the wild stalks of many a thrifty village tree. Nearer yet
to town you come to Breed's location, on the other side of the way, just on the edge of
the wood, ground famous for the pranks of a demon not distinctly named in old mythology,
who has acted a prominent and astounding part in our New England life, and deserves as much
as any mythological character, to have his biography written one day, who first comes
in the guise of a friend or hired man, and then robs and murders the whole family. New
England rum!
But history must not yet tell the tragedies enacted here. Let time intervene in some measure
to assuage and lend an azure tint to them. Here the most indistinct and dubious tradition
says that once a tavern stood, the well the same, which tempered the traveller's beverage
and refreshed his steed. Here then men saluted one another, and heard and told the news,
and went their ways again. Breed's hut was standing only a dozen years ago, though it
had long been unoccupied. It was about the size of mine. It was set on fire by mischievous
boys one election night, if I do not mistake.
I lived on the edge of the village then, and had just lost myself over Davenant's Gondebert,
that winter that I laboured with a lethargy, which, by the way, I never knew whether to
regard as a family complaint, having an uncle who goes to sleep shaving himself, and is
obliged to sprout potatoes in a cellar Sundays in order to keep awake and keep the Sabbath,
or as the consequence of my attempt to read Chalmers' collection of English poetry without
skipping. It fairly overcame my nervi. I had just sunk my head on this when the bells rung
fire, and in hot haste the engines rolled that way, led by a straggling troop of men
and boys, and I among the foremost, for I had leaped the brook. We thought it was far
south over the woods, we who had run to fires before, barn, shop, or dwelling-house, or
all together.
"'It's Baker's Barn,' cried one.
"'It is the Codman place,' affirmed another. And then fresh sparks went up above the wood,
as if the roof fell in, and we all shouted,
"'Concord to the rescue!'
Wagons shot past with furious speed and crushing loads, bearing perchance, among the rest,
the agent of the insurance company, who was bound to go, however far. And ever and anon
the engine bell tinkled behind. More slow and sure and rearmost of all, as it was afterward
whispered, came they who set the fire and gave the alarm.
Thus we kept on like true idealists, rejecting the evidence of our senses, until at a turn
in the road we heard the crackling, and actually felt the heat of the fire from over the wall,
and realized, alas, that we were there. The very nearness of the fire but cooled our ardor,
at first we thought to throw a frog-pond on to it, but concluded to let it burn. It was
so far gone and so worthless. So we stood round our engine, jostled one another, expressed
our sentiments through speaking trumpets, or in lower tone, referred to the great conflagrations
which the world has witnessed, including Bascom's shop, and between ourselves we thought that
were we there in season with our tub, and a full frog-pond by, we could turn that threatened
last and universal one into another flood. We finally retreated without doing any mischief,
returned to sleep and Gondebert, but as for Gondebert I would accept that passage in the
book, and our strangers to wit, as Indians are to powder.
It chanced that I walked that way across the fields the following night, about the same
hour, and hearing a low moaning at this spot, I drew near in the dark and discovered the
only survivor of the family that I know, the heir of both its virtues and its vices, who
alone was interested in this burning. Lying on his stomach and looking over the cellar
wall at the still, smoldering cinders beneath, muttering to himself as is his want, he had
been working far off in the river meadows all day, and had improved the first moments
that he could call his own to visit the home of his fathers and his youth. He gazed into
the cellar from all sides and points of view by turns, always lying down to it, as if there
was some treasure which he remembered concealed between the stones, where there was absolutely
nothing but a heap of bricks and ashes. The house being gone he looked at what there was
left. He was soothed by the sympathy which my mere presence implied, and showed me, as
well as the darkness permitted, where the well was covered up, which, thank heaven,
could never be burned, and he groped long about the wall to find the well sweep which
his father had cut and mounted, feeling for the iron hook or staple by which a burden
had been fastened to the heavy end, all that he could now cling to, to convince me that
it was no common rider. I felt it, and still remark it almost daily in my walks, for by
it hangs the history of a family. Once more on the left, where are seen the well and lilac
bushes by the wall, in the now open field, lived Nutting and La Grosse, but to return
toward Lincoln. Farther in the woods than any of these, where the road approaches nearest
to the pond, Wyman the potter squatted, and furnished his townsmen with earthenware, and
left descendants to succeed him. Neither were they rich in worldly goods, holding the land
by sufferance while they lived, and there often the sheriff came in vain to collect
the taxes, and attached a chip for form's sake, as I have read in his accounts, there
being nothing else that he could lay his hands on. One day in midsummer, when I was hoeing,
a man who was carrying a load of pottery to market stopped his horse against my field
and inquired concerning Wyman the younger. He had long ago bought a potter's wheel of
him and wished to know what had become of him. I had read of the potter's clay and wheel
in scripture, but it had never occurred to me that the pots we use were not such as had
come down unbroken from those days, or grown on trees like gourds somewhere, and I was
pleased to hear that so fictile an art was ever practiced in my neighborhood. The last
inhabitant of these woods before me was an Irishman, Hugh Coyle, if I have spelt his
name with Coyle enough, who occupied Wyman's tenement. Colonel Coyle he was called. Rumors
said that he had been a soldier at Waterloo. If he had lived I should have made him fight
his battles over again. His trade here was that of a ditcher. Napoleon went to St. Helena
Coyle came to Walden Woods. All I know of him is tragic.
He was a man of manners, like one who had seen the world and was capable of more civil
speech than you could well attend to. He wore a great coat in midsummer, being affected
with the trembling delirium, and his face was the color of carmine. He died in the road,
at the foot of Brister's Hill, shortly after I came to the woods, so that I have not remembered
him as a neighbor. Before his house was pulled down, when his comrades avoided it as an unlucky
castle, I visited it. There lay his old clothes, curled up by use as if they were himself,
upon his raised plank bed. His pipe lay broken on the hearth, instead of a bowl broken at
the fountain. The last could never have been the symbol of his death, for he confessed
to me that, though he had heard of Brister's spring, he had never seen it, and soiled cards,
kings of diamonds, spades, and hearts, were scattered over the floor. One black chicken,
which the administrator could not catch, black as night and as silent, not even croaking,
awaited Reynard, still went to roost in the next apartment. In the rear there was the
dim outline of a garden, which had been planted but had never received its first hoeing, owing
to those terrible shaking fits, though it was now harvest time. It was overrun with
Roman wormwood and beggar ticks, which last stuck to my clothes for all fruit. The skin
of a woodchuck was freshly stretched upon the back of the house, a trophy of his last
Waterloo, but no warm cap or mittens would he want more.
Now only a dent in the earth marks the site of these dwellings, with buried cellar stones
and strawberries, raspberries, thimbleberries, hazel bushes, and sumacs growing in the sunny
sward there. Some pitch pine or gnarled oak occupies what was the chimney nook, and a
wheat-scented black birch, perhaps, waves where the door-stone was. Sometimes the well
dent is visible, where once a spring oozed, now dry and tearless grass, or it was covered
deep not to be discovered till some late day, with a flat stone under the sod, when the
last of the race departed. What a sorrowful act must that be, the covering up of wells,
coincident with the opening of wells of tears. These cellar dents, like deserted fox burrows,
old holes, are all that is left, where once were the stir and bustle of human life, and
fate, free will, foreknowledge, absolute, in some form and dialect, or other, were by
turns discussed. But all I can learn of their conclusions amount to just this, that Cato
and Brister pulled wool, which is about as edifying as the history of more famous schools
of philosophy, still grows the vivacious lilac, a generation after the door and lintel
and the sill are gone, unfolding its sweet scented flowers each spring to be plucked
by the musing traveller, planted and tended once by children's hands in front-yard plots,
now standing by wallsides in retired pastures, and giving place to new rising forests, the
last of that sterp sole survivor of that family. Little did the dusky children think that the
puny slip with its two eyes only, which they stuck in the ground in the shadow of the house
and daily watered, would root itself so, and outlive them, and house itself in the rear
that shaded it, and groan man's garden and orchard, and tell their story faintly to the
lone wanderer a half century after they had grown up and died, blossoming as fair and
smelling as sweet as in that first spring. I mark its still tender, civil, cheerful lilac
colours.
But this small village, germ of something more, why did it fail while Concord keeps
its ground? Were there no natural advantages, no water privileges forsooth? Why, the deep
Walden pond and cool brister spring! Privilege to drink long and healthy draughts at these,
all unimproved by these men, but to dilute their glass. They were universally a thirsty
race. Might not the basket, stable broom, mat-making, corn-parching, linen-spinning,
and pottery business have thrived here, making the wilderness to blossom like the rose, and
a numerous posterity have inherited the land of their fathers? The sterile soil would at
least have been proof against a low land degeneracy. Alas, how little does the memory
of these human inhabitants enhance the beauty of the landscape? Again, perhaps, nature will
try, with me for a first settler, and my house raised last spring to be the oldest in the
hamlet. I am not aware that any man has ever built on the spot which I occupy. Deliver
me from a city built on the site of a more ancient city, whose materials are ruins, whose
gardens, cemeteries. The soil is blanched and accursed there, and before that becomes
necessary, the earth itself will be destroyed. With some reminiscences I re-peopled the woods
and lulled myself to sleep. At this season I seldom had a visitor. When the snow lay
deepest no wanderer ventured near my house for a week or fortnight at a time, but there
I lived, as snug as a meadow mouse, or as cattle and poultry which are said to have
survived for a long time buried in drifts even without food, or like that early settler's
family in the town of Sutton, in this state, whose cottage was completely covered by the
great snow of 1717, when he was absent, and an Indian founded only by the hole which the
chimney's breath made in the drift, and so relieved the family. But no friendly Indian
concerned himself about me, nor needed he, for the master of the house was at home.
The great snow, how cheerful it is to hear of, when the farmers could not get to the
woods and swamps with their teams, and were obliged to cut down the shade-trees before
their houses, and when the crust was harder cut off the trees and the swamps, ten feet
from the ground, as it appeared the next spring. In the deepest snows the path which I used
from the highway to my house, about half a mile long, might have been represented by
a meandering dotted line, with wide intervals between the dots. For a week of even weather
I took exactly the same number of steps, and of the same length, coming and going, stepping
deliberately and with the precision of a pair of dividers in my own deep tracks. To such
a routine the winter reduces us, yet often they were filled with heaven's own blue.
But no weather interfered fatally with my walks, or rather my going abroad, for I frequently
tramped eight or ten miles through the deepest snow to keep an appointment with a beech-tree
or a yellow birch, or an old acquaintance among the pines, when the ice and snow causing
their limbs to droop, and so sharpening their tops, had changed the pines into fir-trees.
Wading to the tops of the highest hills when the snow was nearly two feet deep on a level,
and shaking down another snowstorm on my head at every step, or sometimes creeping and floundering
thither on my hands and knees when the hunters had gone into winter quarters, one afternoon
I amused myself by watching a barred owl, Strix nebulosa, sitting on one of the lower
dead limbs of a white pine, close to the trunk, in broad daylight, I standing within a rod
of him. He could hear me when I moved, and crunched the snow with my feet, but could
not plainly see me. When I made most noise he would stretch out his neck and erect his
neck feathers, and open his eyes wide. But their lids soon fell again, and he began to
nod. I, too, felt a slumberous influence after watching him half an hour, as he sat thus
with his eyes half open, like a cat, winged brother of the cat. There was only a narrow
slit left between their lids, by which be preserved a peninsular relation to me, thus
with half-shut eyes looking out from the land of dreams, and endeavoring to realize me,
vague object or moat that interrupts his visions. At length, on some louder noise, or my nearer
approach, he would grow uneasy, and sluggishly turn about on his perch, as if impatient at
having his dreams disturbed. And when he launched himself off, and flapped through
the pines, spreading his wings to unexpected breadth, I could not hear the slightest sound
from them. Thus guided amid the pine boughs, rather by a delicate sense of their neighborhood
than by sight, feeling his twilight way, as it were, with his sensitive pinions, he found
a new perch where he might in peace await the dawning of his day.
As I walked over the long causeway made for the railroad through the meadows, I encountered
many a blustering and nipping wind, for nowhere has it freer play. And when the frost had
smitten me on one cheek, heathen as I was, I turned it to the other also, nor was it
much better by the carriage-road from Brister's Hill, for I came to town still like a friendly
Indian, when the contents of the broad open fields were all piled up between the walls
of the Walden Road, and half an hour sufficed to obliterate the tracks of the last traveler.
And when I returned new drifts would have formed, through which I floundered, where
the busy north-west wind had been depositing the powdery snow round a sharp angle in the
road, and not a rabbit's track, nor even the fine print the small type of a meadow-mouse
was to be seen. Yet I rarely failed to find, even in midwinter, some warm and springy swamp,
where the grass and the skunk cabbage still put forth their perennial verdure, and some
hardier bird occasionally awaited the return of spring.
Sometimes, notwithstanding the snow, when I returned from my walk at evening I crossed
the deep tracks of a wood-chopper leading from my door, and found his pile of whittlings
on the hearth, and my house filled with the odor of his pipe. Or on a Sunday afternoon,
if I chanced to be at home, I heard the crunching of the snow made by the step of a long-headed
farmer, whom from far through the woods sought my house to have a social crack. One of the
few of his vocation who are men of their farms, who donned a frock instead of a professor's
gown, and is as ready to extract the moral out of church or state as to haul a load of
manure from his barnyard, we talked of rude and simple times, when men sat about large
fires in cold bracing weather with clear heads, and when other dessert failed, we tried our
teeth on many a nut which wise squirrels have long since abandoned, for those which have
the thickest shells are commonly empty.
The one who came from farthest to my lodge, through deepest snows and most dismal tempests,
was a poet, a farmer, a hunter, a soldier, a reporter, even a philosopher may be daunted,
but nothing can deter a poet, for he is actuated by pure love. Who can predict that a poet
can predict his comings and goings? His business calls him out at all hours, even when doctors
sleep. We made that small house ring with boisterous mirth, and resound with the murmur
of much sober talk, making amends then to Walden Vale for the long silences. Broadway
was still and deserted in comparison. At suitable intervals there were regular salutes of laughter,
which might have been referred indifferently to the last uttered or the forthcoming jest.
We made many a brand new theory of life over a thin dish of gruel, which combined the advantages
of conviviality with the clear headedness which philosophy requires. I should not forget
that during my last winter at the pond there was another welcome visitor, who at one time
came through the village, through snow and rain and darkness, till he saw my lamp through
the trees, and shared with me some long winter evenings. One of the last of the philosophers
Connecticut gave him to the world. He peddled first her wares, afterwards, as he declares,
his brains. These he peddles still, prompting God and disgracing man, bearing for fruit
his brain only, like the nut its kernel. I think that he must be the man of the most
faith of any alive. His words and attitude always suppose a better state of things than
other men are acquainted with, and he will be the last man to be disappointed as the
ages revolve. He has no venture in the present, but though comparatively disregarded now,
when his day comes laws unsuspected by most will take effect, and masters of families
and rulers will come to him for advice. How blind that cannot see serenity! A true friend
of man, almost the only friend of human progress, an old mortality, say rather, of the most
unwearying, an immortality, with unwearyed patience and faith making plain the image
engraven in men's bodies, the God of whom they are but defaced and leaning monuments.
With his hospitable intellect he embraces children, beggars, insane, and scholars, and
wealth and elegance. I think that he should keep a caravanseri on the world's highway,
where philosophers of all nations might put up, and on his sign should be printed, Entertainment
for man, but not for his beast. Enter ye that have leisure and a quiet mind, who earnestly
seek the right road. He is perhaps the sanest man, and has the fewest crotchets of any I
chance to know, the same yesterday and tomorrow. Of yore we had sauntered and talked, and effectually
put the world behind us, for he was pledged to no institution in it, free born in genus,
which ever way we turned, it seemed that the heavens and the earth had met together, since
he enhanced the beauty of the landscape. A blue-robed man, whose fittest roof is the
overarching sky which reflects his serenity. I do not see how he can ever die. Nature cannot
spare him.
Having each some shingles of thought well dried, we sat and whittled them, trying our
knives and admiring the clear yellowish grain of the pumpkin pine. We waited so gently and
reverently, or we pulled together so smoothly that the fishes of thought were not scared
from the stream, nor feared any angler on the bank, but came and went grandly, like
the clouds which float through the western sky, and the mother-o'-pearl flocks which
sometimes form and dissolve there. There we worked, revising mythology, rounding a fable
here and there, and building castles in the air, for which earth offered no worthy foundation.
Great looker, great expector, to converse with whom was a new England night's entertainment.
Ah, such discourse we had, hermit and philosopher, and the old settler I have spoken of. We three,
it expanded and racked my little house. I should not dare to say how many pounds weight
there was above the atmospheric pressure on every circular inch. It opened its seams so
that they had to be caulked with much dullness thereafter to stop the consequent leak, but
I had enough of that kind of oakum already picked. There was one other with whom I had
solid seasons, long to be remembered, at his house in the village, and who looked in upon
me from time to time, but I had no more for society there. There, too, as everywhere,
I sometimes expected the visitor who never comes. The Vishnu Purana says, The householder
is to remain at Eventide in his courtyard as long as it takes to milk a cow, or longer
if he pleases, to await the arrival of a guest. I often performed this duty of hospitality,
waited long enough to milk a whole herd of cows, but did not see the man approaching
from the town.